---
title: Lie-theoretic preamble
tags: 
    [symmetries]
---

In order to have a good grasp on research level symmetry analysis à la Lie, one would imagine that a solid level of Lie theory ought to be a prerequisite. Interestingly enough that is not really the case, as only a few Lie-theoretic concepts (in the modern sense of "Lie theory", anyway) are required to understand the applied literature. The same can be said of the manifold theory, and in this note I intend to cover most of what I feel is needed from Olver's book [^fn1] concerning Lie theory.

First of all, I will not cover what a smooth manifold is, as this almost does not matter. If you have a vague understanding of this concept, that is enough. However, there are certain conventions owed to manifold theory and differential geometry that could be confusing if the reader is unfamiliar with these topics. For instance, the notation of vector fields as derivations could be one such convention. More information on this can be found in Tu's book [^fn2] on manifold theory. Secondly, I will also assume that the reader is familiar with basic group theory. Thirdly, some basic topology is needed to comfortably understand what "open" and "local" means on an intuitive level. 

## Lie groups as transformation groups

The most basic and well-known definition is that of a Lie group.
>[!quote] Definition (Lie group)
>A *Lie group* is a smooth manifold $$ G $$ together with a multiplication map $$ m\colon G\times G\to G $$ and an inversion map $$ i\colon G \to G $$ that are both smooth and together define a group structure on $$ G $$. 

Assume that $$ M $$ is a smooth manifold. We would like to define what it means for a group $$ G $$ to *locally* transform points in $$ M $$ to $$ M $$ itself. Consider a transformation map $$ \Psi\colon \mathscr{O} \to M $$, where $$ \mathscr{O} \subset G\times M $$ is open. It is clear that $$ \Psi(e, x) = x $$ makes sense since transforming via the identity $$ e\in G $$ ought to do nothing. Thus $$ \{ e\}\times M \subset \mathscr{O} $$. We would also insist on $$ \Psi (g^{-1}, \Psi(g,x)) = x $$, and hence $$ \Psi(g\cdot h, x) = \Psi(g,\Psi(h,x)) $$ where $$ g\cdot h $$ is the group multiplication. In order for $$ \Psi $$ to retain smoothness we require that the group $$ G $$ is a Lie group and that $$ g\cdot h = m(g,h) $$ and $$ g^{-1} = i(g) $$. Hence we have defined the *local group action* $$ g\cdot x \equiv \Psi(g,x) $$ on $$ M $$, where the Lie group $$ G $$ is called the local group of transformations. The set of points hit by $$ g\cdot x $$ when $$ g\in G $$ is varying such that the action remains defined is called the *orbit* of $$ x $$. 

An important concept is the (semi-) regularity of this action:
>[!quote] Definition (Semi-regular and regular actions)
> Let $$ G $$ be a local group of transformations acting on $$ M $$. We say $$ G $$ acts *semi-regularly* on $$ M $$ if all orbits have equal local dimension to that of submanifolds of $$ M $$, and *regularly* if, in addition to being semi-regular, any open neighborhood of $$ M $$ intersects any orbit of $$ G $$ in a path-connected subset.  

The preceding concepts are crucial in the study of symmetries of algebraic equations. 

## Lie algebras defined through flows
Assume that the vector field $$ \mathbf{v} $$ on $$ M $$ when evaluated at a point $$ x\in M $$ takes the form 
$$
\mathbf{v}\big|_x = \sum_{k=1}^m \xi^k(x) \frac{\partial}{\partial x^k}
$$
in local coordinates $$ (x_1,\ldots, x_m) $$. We define the *flow generated by* $$ \mathbf{v} $$ as the (unique) solution $$\Psi$$ to the system
$$
\mathbf{v}\big|_x = \frac{\mathrm{d}}{\mathrm{d}\varepsilon}\bigg|_{\varepsilon=0} \Psi(\varepsilon, x).
$$
This solution defines the *exponential map* which links the local group transformations with the infinitesimal vector fields, and we denote
$$
\mathrm{exp}(\varepsilon \mathbf{v}) x \equiv \Psi(\varepsilon, x). 
$$
The exponential map gives rise to a one-parameter group out of $$ \varepsilon $$, and therefore coincides with an orbit containing $$ x $$. The reason for calling it the exponential can be justified in the fact that taking the $$\varepsilon$$-derivative and evaluating at $$\varepsilon=0$$ recovers the vector field $$\mathbf{v}$$. Note that if $$ f\colon M \to \mathbb{R} $$ is a function, we can evaluate on the flow $$ f(\exp(\varepsilon \mathbf{v})x)$$ and compute the derivative
$$
\begin{align*}
\frac{\mathrm{d}}{\mathrm{d}\varepsilon}\bigg|_{\varepsilon=0} f(\exp(\varepsilon\mathbf{v})x) &= \left( \sum_{k=1}^m \xi^k(\exp(\varepsilon\mathbf{v})x)\frac{\partial f}{\partial x^k}(\exp(\varepsilon\mathbf{v})x)\right)\bigg|_{\varepsilon=0} \\
&= \mathbf{v}(f)[\exp(\varepsilon\mathbf{v})x]\bigg|_{\varepsilon=0} = \mathbf{v}(f)(x).
\end{align*}
$$
It is clear that if we differentiated twice, then the result would be $$ \tfrac{1}{2}\mathbf{v}\circ\mathbf{v}(f)(x) \equiv \tfrac{1}{2}\mathbf{v}^2(f)(x)$$, and likewise for higher order derivatives. Then, we can expand in a Taylor series about $$\varepsilon=0$$:
$$
f(\exp(\varepsilon\mathbf{v})x) = \sum_{k=0}^\infty \frac{\varepsilon^k}{k!} \mathbf{v}^k(f)(x).
$$
For vector-valued functions $$F\colon M\to \mathbb{R}^n$$ one has a similar identity when vector fields $$\mathbf{v}$$ are allowed to act component-wise on $$F$$ through $$\mathbf{v}(F) = (\mathbf{v}(F^1),\ldots,\mathbf{v}(F^n))$$. 

This already resembles the usual exponential quite a bit, but if we evaluate on the component function $$ f(x) = x^j $$ for $$j=1,\ldots,m$$, then the $$j$$-th component of the flow is given by
$$
(\exp(\varepsilon\mathbf{v})x)^j = x^j + \varepsilon \xi(x^j) + \frac{\varepsilon^2}{2} \mathbf{v}(\xi)(x^j) + \cdots.
$$
The exponential map can then be restated as 
$$
\exp(\varepsilon\mathbf{v})x = \sum_{k=0}^\infty \frac{\varepsilon^k}{k!}\mathbf{v}^k(x). 
$$

Let $$ \mathbf{v}, \mathbf{u} $$ be two vector fields, and consider the action of $$ \mathbf{v} $$ on $$f$$ evaluated at $$\exp(\varepsilon \mathbf{u})x$$. We are interested in comparing this action in the point of $$ x $$, so we have to apply the pushforward $$\mathrm{d}(\exp(-\varepsilon\mathbf{u})x)$$ to the action so as to "bring everything back to $$x$$", as it were. Taking the derivative with respect to $$\varepsilon$$ yields the following
$$
\frac{\mathrm{d}}{\mathrm{d}\varepsilon}\bigg|_{\varepsilon=0}\mathrm{d}\exp(-\varepsilon\mathbf{u})\mathbf{v}\big|_{\exp(\varepsilon \mathbf{u})x}(f) =  \lim_{\varepsilon\to 0} \frac{\mathrm{d}\exp(-\varepsilon\mathbf{u})\mathbf{v}\big|_{\exp(\varepsilon \mathbf{u})x}(f)(x) - \mathbf{v}\big|_{x}(f)(x)}{\varepsilon}
$$

The differential of the exponential applied to $$\mathbf{v}\big|_{\exp(\varepsilon \mathbf{u})x}$$ can be realized as 
$$
\mathrm{d}\exp(-\varepsilon\mathbf{u})\mathbf{v}\big|_{\exp(\varepsilon \mathbf{u})x} = \frac{\mathrm{d}}{\mathrm{d}t}\bigg|_{t=0} \exp(-\varepsilon\mathbf{u}) \exp(t\mathbf{v})\exp(\varepsilon \mathbf{u})x
$$

We focus on the latter expression, and expand in Taylor series with the identity $$ F(\exp(\varepsilon\mathbf{v})x) = F(x) + \varepsilon\mathbf{v}(F)(x) + O(\varepsilon^2)$$ in mind:
$$
\begin{align*}
\exp(-\varepsilon\mathbf{u}) \exp(t\mathbf{v})\exp(\varepsilon \mathbf{u})x &= \exp(-\varepsilon\mathbf{u})\exp(t\mathbf{v})x + \varepsilon\mathbf{u}\exp(-\varepsilon\mathbf{u})\exp(t\mathbf{v})x + O(\varepsilon^2) \\
&= \exp(-\varepsilon\mathbf{u})x + t\mathbf{v}\exp(-\varepsilon\mathbf{u})x \\
&\quad + \varepsilon\mathbf{u}(\exp(-\varepsilon\mathbf{u})x + t\mathbf{v}\exp(-\varepsilon\mathbf{u})x) + O(\varepsilon^2) + O(t^2),
\end{align*}
$$
whereupon taking the $$t$$-derivative and evaluating at $$t=0$$ yields 
$$
\mathbf{v}(x) -\varepsilon \mathbf{v}\circ\mathbf{u}(x) + \varepsilon \mathbf{u}\circ\mathbf{v}(x) + O(\varepsilon^2).
$$
Finally, our computed vector field is the *Lie derivative* $$\mathcal{L}_\mathbf{u}(\mathbf{v})$$ of $$\mathbf{v}$$ with respect to $$\mathbf{u}$$, and in our case yields the defining property of the *Lie bracket* of the vector fields $$\mathbf{u}$$ and $$\mathbf{v}$$:
$$
\mathcal{L}_{\mathbf{u}}(\mathbf{v})(f) = [\mathbf{u},\mathbf{v}](f) = \mathbf{u}(\mathbf{v}(f)) - \mathbf{v}(\mathbf{u}(f)).
$$
Indeed, the Lie bracket in this case is the *unique* vector field with the latterly stated property.

The above derivation sketches how one would define the Lie algebra out of flows, yet the abstract definition reads as follows.
>[!quote] Definition (Lie algebra)
>A *Lie algebra* is a vector space $$\frak{g}$$ endowed with a bracket $$ [ \cdot\,, \cdot]\colon \frak{g}\times\frak{g} \to \frak{g} $$ that is $$\mathbb{R}$$-bilinear, skew-symmetric and satisfies the Jacobi identity
>$$
>[\mathbf{u},[\mathbf{v},\mathbf{w}]]+[\mathbf{v},[\mathbf{w},\mathbf{u}]]+[\mathbf{w},[\mathbf{u},\mathbf{v}]] = 0
>$$
> for all $$ \mathbf{u},\mathbf{v},\mathbf{w} \in \frak{g}$$. The bracket is then called the *Lie bracket* on $$\frak{g}$$.

This definition allows for examples such as the Cartesian space with the cross product $$(\mathbb{R}^3, \times)$$ as an example of a Lie algebra, while obviously the bracket in which case is different from the one derived above: $$[\mathbf{u},\mathbf{v}](f) = \mathbf{u}\times\mathbf{v}(f) \neq \mathbf{u}\circ\mathbf{v}(f) - \mathbf{v}\circ\mathbf{u}(f)$$. This will not become a problem, however, if the Lie algebras of interest are derived from Lie groups. 

## Lie algebras of Lie groups
The discussion above can be specialized to when $$M=G$$ is a Lie group, in which case one also has a group structure to play with. In this case, we identify the tangent space at the identity $$e\in G$$ with the associated Lie algebra: $$T_e G \simeq \frak{g}$$. Why at the identity? Because any element $$g$$ sufficiently close to the identity can be recovered from the product of finitely many elements close to the identity (see the theorem listed further below in the "connectedness" section). Furthermore, said elements can be written as elements from one-parameter subgroups of the form $$g_\varepsilon = \exp(\varepsilon\mathbf{v})e \equiv \exp(\varepsilon\mathbf{v})$$ for some $$\varepsilon\in\mathbb{R}$$ and some $$\mathbf{v}\in \frak{g}$$, hence $$g = \exp(\varepsilon\mathbf{v}_1)\cdots\exp(\varepsilon\mathbf{v}_k)$$. 

## Notes on connectedness
We assume as a blanket hypothesis that all Lie groups considered are connected. This is not just for convenience, but of crucial importance when considering the lifting of Lie groups to Lie algebras. Disconnected Lie groups give rise to discrete symmetries which are of great importance in fields like particle physics (e.g. parity transforms), but these groups also carry a discrete topology which disallows the forthright usage of the infinitesimal theory established in Olver's text. 

>[!note] Theorem
>Let $$G$$ be a connected Lie group and let $$\mathscr{O}\subset G$$ be an open neighborhood of the identity $$e\in G$$. Then any element $$g\in G$$ can be written as a finite product of elements from $$\mathscr{O}$$. 


From Kirillov's notes on Lie theory [^fn3]:

>[!note] Theorem 
> Every morphism of Lie groups $$ \varphi\colon G_1 \to G_2 $$ defines a morphism of Lie algebras $$ \varphi_* \colon \frak{g}_1 \to \frak{g}_2 $$, and if $$ G_1 $$ is connected, the map 
>$$ 
>\begin{align*} \mathrm{Hom}(G_1, G_2) &\to \mathrm{Hom}(\frak{g}_1, \frak{g}_2) \\ \varphi &\mapsto \varphi_* \end{align*} 
>$$
> defines an injective map. Hence, one can recover the group action on a Lie group $$ G $$ through the commutator on $$ \frak{g} $$. Even stronger: if $$ G_1 $$ is simply connected then $$\mathrm{Hom}(G_1, G_2) = \mathrm{Hom}(\frak{g}_1, \frak{g}_2) $$.








[^fn1]: P. Olver, Applications of Lie Groups to Differential Equations. Springer New York, 1993.
[^fn2]: L. Tu, An Introduction to Manifolds. Springer New York, 2011.
[^fn3]: A. Kirillov, Introduction to Lie Groups and Lie Algebras, https://www.math.stonybrook.edu/~kirillov/mat552/liegroups.pdf
